+++
title = "std time"
date = 2019-06-25
+++

Over the past month we've been hard at work to add [`time` support] to the
[Runtime] crate. One of the things we've had to think about has been examples.
Which means we've had a chance to become intimately familiar with the good and
less good parts of the `std::time` API.

In this post we'll look at the `std::time` API, and some of the proposed
changes to smooth things out a bit. Also disclaimer: I've been involved with
these proposals, hehe.

[`time` support]: https://docs.rs/runtime/0.3.0-alpha.5/runtime/time/index.html
[Runtime]: https://blog.yoshuawuyts.com/runtime/

## Time Types
A quick refresher on what's inside `std::time`. There are two types you need to
know about: [`Duration`] and [`Instant`]. An `Instant` represents a _specific_
point in time. A `Duration` is a _relative_ time offset. This is different from
some languages which only have a single time type. Personally I quite like
Rust's approach of having two.

Let's put the time types together to first get the current timestamp. Then
sleep the thread for 2 seconds. And finally print how much time has passed.

```rust
use std::time::{Duration, Instant};
use std::thread::sleep;

let now = Instant::now();
sleep(Duration::from_secs(2));
println!("{}", now.elapsed().as_secs());
```

[`Duration`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/time/struct.Duration.html
[`Instant`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/time/struct.Instant.html

## Creating Durations
As we've seen before, durations can be created using
`Duration::from_secs(n)`. This works well, but is rather verbose. Not only do
we have to import two layers deep, we also need to remember the name of the
method. All in all it takes some getting used to.

Which is why in
[rust-lang/rust#57391](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/57391)
there's a proposal to add constants to the time module. These constants would
represent a single unit of time, which could then be used for addition,
substraction and multiplication. E.g. 5 milliseconds is 5 times the
millisecond constant.

The exact API is still undecided. But I think it would be nice if the APIs
were brief, and exposed directly under `std::time`. This would allow us to
rewrite our example as:

```rust
use std::time::Instant;
use std::thread::sleep;

let now = Instant::now();
sleep(2 * time::SEC);
println!("{}", now.elapsed().as_secs());
```

## Creating Instants
Just like creating `Duration`s can likely be simplified, so can creating
`Instant`s. The most common way of creating an `Instant` is by calling
`Instant::now`. This too has the problem that we need to remember the exact
type, and call two layers deep into the `std` hierarchy.

Which is why
[rust-lang/rust#62114](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/62114)
proposes to add a `time::now` method. This behaves the same as
`time::Instant::now`, but should be more pleasant to use. An example:

```rust
use std::{time, thread};

let now = time::now();
thread::sleep(2 * time::SEC);
println!("{}", now.elapsed().as_secs());
```

## Debug Durations
One of the first gotchas you might experience when dealing with time in Rust
is that you cannot simply print a `Duration`. If you're like me, you'll run
into this, and after some searching find out that you need to specify a
resolution before you can print. E.g. `dur.as_secs` or `dur.as_millis`.

This is not great because if you're doing _exploratory_ programming and/or
debugging, you may not know the resolution up front. Which means you might
need a few tries to find the right resolution. Which isn't a dealbreaker, but
it takes speed out of the process.

Instead it would be nice if we could print `Duration`s (and `Instant`s for
that matter), where they would provide data for _all_ resolutions it
encapsulates.

```rust
Duration {
    secs: 6,
    millis: 6225,
    micros: 6224768,
    nanos: 6224767054,
}
```

Perhaps we might also need a pretty-printed version of this. E.g. print
`6.225 secs` as the `Display` impl. I'm not sure whether that's acceptable
for a stdlib extension, but I sure know that it would make debugging time a
lot easier.

Anyway, let's apply this to our example:

```rust
use std::{time, thread};

let now = time::now();
thread::sleep(2 * time::SEC);
dbg!(now.elapsed());
```

## Conclusion
In this post we've talked about the `std::time` module, and some of the
changes that could be made to smooth out the workflow.

I hope this was a useful insight into how the `std::time` module can be
improved. I figured I'd write this post because I spent some time earlier
today filing an issue, and thought sharing an overarching vision might be
nice.

Thanks for reading all, and hope you have a lovely (non-scorched) week!
