+++
title = "Rust 2019"
date = 2019-01-15
+++

Hey everyone! Two days ago I released my [plans for
2019](https://blog.yoshuawuyts.com/plans-for-2019/). Earlier today I wrote about
what I'd like to see for [Rust WASM in
2019](https://blog.yoshuawuyts.com/wasm-2019/). This is my post about what I'd
like to see happen with Rust in 2019.

However unlike my two previous posts, I'd like to keep this one short and sweet.

## Speaking is silver
I've been drafting this post for the past two months. However none of it felt
right. I think it's probably because others have put my feelings into words
better than I'm currently capable of. There are two posts I'd like you to read:

First off is [Boats' post on organizational
debt](https://boats.gitlab.io/blog/post/rust-2019/). It touches on how we
organize ourselves, and the problems we're facing. I feel it distills so well
which challenges we face as an organization, and feel it ought to set the tone
on what to prioritize in this year's roadmap.

The second post is [Gattozzi's
post](https://mgattozzi.com/rust-in-2019-the-next-year-and-edition/). It feels
very personal and it's focused around his experiences with the people in Rust.
I recognize myself a lot in those experiences. The community is changing, and
we'll have to think of how we plan to change with it.

---

Have you read the two posts above? Yes? Great! Thank you for your time. From
here on out it's desserts only.

### No silos, no heroes
My main joy in programming stems from curiosity. I love learning new things,
figuring out how things work, and trying to improve them. The more open systems
are, the better this works. Which is why I got involved with open source in the
first place, and Rust with its RFC process later on.

However this becomes harder when systems are closed. When decision making is
opaque, code is hard to understand, or people use their status to justify
their actions. Every community has to deal with this, and Rust is no different.

I encourage everyone to reflect on who they look up to, and why. Which pieces of
code we think are cool, but don't understand. Which crucial projects are lead by
people, not teams. We should think about what kind of community we want to be,
and how we can ensure we can get there, together.

### Inclusive behavior
I often think about [this
tweet](https://twitter.com/aurynn/status/1062848550197911553) by Aurynn:

> Diversity is an emergent effect of inclusive behaviour.

I'd describe "inclusive behaviour" as behaviour that makes people feel valued,
welcome, and not threatened. Perhaps even simpler: behaviour that doesn't
actively exclude people ([except people that exclude
others](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox_of_tolerance)).

I know we'd all like to believe the Rust community is a shining example of what
a programming community should look like. But have we truly reached the pinnacle
of behavior. Is there collectively no more room for improvement?

This definitely ties back into the two posts I linked to at the start of this
post. But instead of proposing directions for the core team to take: I'd like
this to be a call for each of us to reflect on how we interact with other
people.

Being welcoming is our collective responsibility. The way we behave reflects on
our peers. And the way our peers behave is a reflection of us.

## Wrapping Up
And that's it for this year! I hope this has been useful! I'm starting to get a
taste for writing posts, so perhaps I'll write about more things going forward.
But anyway, it's late here, so I'm going to call it a night for now.

Hope you're well / have a good eve!
