+++
title = "contexts"
date = 2019-03-31
+++

I've recently been thinking a lot about Rust's ergonomics, especially around async and error
handling. I've come up with quite a few fun ideas that I'm excited to share. But I think that before
I can meaningfully explain their significance, it's important to take a step back and create a lens
through which to view them.

_Note: I'm don't consider myself a language designer, so don't take this as language design advise.
I mostly just wanted to talk about how I'm currently thinking about things, and figured writing this
in long-form might be better than as a string of tweets. Anyway, this is all just my opinion &
thoughts, and I'm not on Rust's lang team so this is in no way representative of anyone on there._

And with that said, let's dig in!

## Matrix
I think one of the cool things about Rust is that it's a single language that allows you to write
the low-level bits of a program, and the high-level abstractions in the same language. This means
that we have a language that needs to balance an incredible amount of different aspects, and merge
them into a cohesive whole.

This is not easy, and I can't claim to have nailed the grand unifying theory of language design. But
I do think I have a neat angle to apply to _high level Rust design_. It's the following table:

|                | __Synchronous__                      | __Asynchronous__                                   |
| ---            | ---                                  | ---                                                |
| __Infallible__ | `fn foo () {}`                       | `fn foo() -> Future<Item = ()>{}`                  |
| __Fallible__   | `fn foo () -> Result<(), io::Error>` | `fn foo() -> Future<Item = Result<(), io::Error>>` |

I think for high-level Rust there are essentially 2 axis, and 4 different language combinations.
There's the question whether operations can fail or not. And the question whether functions can be
suspended or not (e.g. futures in this case, though generators behave similarly).

Using this lens we can explain some of the historical problems we've had. E.g. the original Futures
design didn't care to handle the Infallible + Asynchronous case; probably because it didn't consider
anyone might ever need it. But then Fuschia came along, and very clearly _did_ need it, which meant
another round of design was needed.

## Contexts
In fact, a good way of viewing the different axis in the table is as _contexts_. If we're in a
function that returns a `Result`, we're in a _fallible context_. If we're in a function that returns
a `Future`, we're in an _async context_.

Rust's language design acknowledges that async contexts are a real thing, and has appropriately
introduced the `async fn` keyword. This sugar has allowed the language to remove a lot of
boilerplate around suspension points, and borrowing across them, creating a better experience
throughout.

I think we have similar boilerplate problems with `Result`, and by treating it as the dual of `async
fn` we could create a better experience -- in particular for fallible contexts that don't return
values (getting rid of `Ok(())` _everywhere_).

Given we could have a `throw` keyword in argument position, we could then have clearer signaling of
the context we're executing in, and in turn remove all the boilerplate currently required to achieve
the same result.

|                | __Synchronous__                | __Asynchronous__                    |
| ---            | ---                            | ---                                 |
| __Infallible__ | `fn foo () {}`                 | `async fn foo() {}`                 |
| __Fallible__   | `fn foo () -> throw io::Error` | `async fn foo() -> throw io::Error` |

Just to finish the thought: fallible contexts would pair with a `throw` keyword in body position to
return errors:

```rust
// current
return Err(e);

// new
throw e;
```

Also none of this is my idea. I believe various stages of RFCs and discussions exist around this in
the wild. But I hope the general point makes sense about contexts.

## Applications of the Context Lens
Some other language features I've been applying this lens to is extensions of async await. For
example yielding a `TcpStream` is always fallible, so what if we introduced a way to consider
_fallible iterators_? What about _async fallible iterators_?
```rust
// synchonous, current
let listener = TcpListener::bind("127.0.0.1:80")?;
for stream in listener.incoming() {
    let stream = stream?;
    stream.write_all(b"hello world")?;
}
```

I think most people would agree that `let stream = stream?` feels like a bit of boilerplate that
could probably be considered in the language design. What would it look like if we could fill out
this chart?

|                | __Synchronous__           | __Asynchronous__ |
| ---            | ---                       | ---              |
| __Infallible__ | `for item in iterator {}` | ?                |
| __Fallible__   | ?                         | ?                |

Similarly there's been talk about adding a `select {}` keyword for futures. There's currently a
`select!{}` and `try_select!{}` macro in the `future-preview` crate.

```rust
// The first future to complete will assign its value to `res`.
// All other futures are then cancelled.

let res = await select {
    my_struct.do_thing(),
    other_struct.thing()
}
```

The synchronous counterpart to awaiting futures would probably blocking threads until a thread's
`JoinHandle` returns. Filling out the chart again, what would each entry be?

|                | __Synchronous__ | __Asynchronous__  |
| ---            | ---             | ---               |
| __Infallible__ | ?               | `await select {}` |
| __Fallible__   | ?               | ?                 |

## Other Contexts
But the above is not the only way to slice our cake. There are many more constraints to consider
when thinking about features:

- Do we have `std` support?
- Are we in a `const` context?
- Are we in a browser? E.g. `wasm32-unknown-unknown` probably means we can't use the usual
  networking / filesystem APIs.

And the slightly more difficult topic of:

- How does it compare if we tried to solve this problem in userland?
- How does this feature interact with future follow-ups?
- How does this feature interact with currently proposed language extensions?
- Who are we building this feature for?
- Are there any unsolved problem

## Conclusion
And that's it. There's not much of a conclusion here. But I wanted to write down how I'm currently
thinking about (language) design, and the lens I'm applying. I think building up lenses like these
are useful to consider design decisions through, and I hope I can build up a bigger collection of
these as time goes on.

Anyway, I hope this is useful!
