+++
title = "Paw"
date = 2019-05-06
+++

Today we're announcing [paw](https://docs.rs/paw/1.0.0/paw/), a first step by the CLI Working Group to make command line applications more
first class in Rust.

We introduce a procedural macro `paw::main` that allows passing arguments to `fn main`, and a new trait
`ParseArgs` that must be implemented by the arguments to `main`. This allows passing not only the classic
`std::env::Args` to `main` but also, for example, `structopt` instances.

__print_args__
```rust
fn main(args: std::env::Args) {
    for arg in args {
        println!("{:?}", arg);
    }
}
```

```sh
$ cargo run --example print_args -- hello world
"hello"
"world"
```

__structopt__
```rust
#[derive(structopt::StructOpt)]
struct Args {
    address: String,
    port: u16,
}

async fn main(args: Args) -> Result<(), failure::Error> {
    let mut app = tide::App::new(());
    app.at("/").get(async |_| "Hello, world!");
    app.serve((args.address, args.port)).await?;
}
```

```sh
$ cargo run --example structopt -- localhost 8080
```

Our hope is that by allowing flexible passing of arguments to `fn main` we can make command line
parsing feel more intuitive for new Rustaceans and seasoned experts alike.

## Paw today
What `paw` brings is a stepping stone to enable our vision of first-class command line parsing in
Rust. We envision a place where `ParseArgs` is included in stdlib, and `std::env::Args` implements
it out of the box. However, as a precursor to an RFC we want to polish the ergonomics and test the
usability of `paw` to get it right.

With `paw` today the `print` example can be written as:
```rust
#[paw::main]
fn main(args: paw::Args) {
    for arg in args {
        println!("{:?}", arg);
    }
}
```
This should provide a comparable experience to what a potential std experience would be like.

## How does the trait work?
The trait has 1 method: `parse_args` which returns a `Result<Self>`. Because this must be known
at compile time, `Self` needs to be `Sized`, and we have an associated `Error` type too. In total
the declaration is about 4 lines, which means as far as traits go it's quite small.

```rust
pub trait ParseArgs: Sized {
    type Error;
    fn parse_args() -> Result<Self, Self::Error>;
}
```

The `paw::main` macro detects if the trait is implemented for the argument passed in at runtime, and then
replaces `(args: Args)` with `let args = Args::parse_args()` inside the function body. We suspect
that adding similar functionality to std would be a (relatively) small change too.

## Conclusion
We've introduced `paw`, a crate to enable arguments in main. It consists of a proc macro, trait, and
wrappers around stdlib's `std::env::Args` and `std::env::ArgsOs` types.

`paw` is available on GitHub as [rust-cli/paw](https://github.com/rust-cli/paw), and on crates.io as
[paw](https://crates.io/crates/paw). Happy hacking!

## Thanks
Thanks to [stjepang](https://github.com/stjepang/) and [Dylan-DPC](https://github.com/Dylan-DPC) for
help with the implementation. And all of the CLI WG for help and feedback on the API and this post.
