# Party tricks with ES6 symbols

Symbols are a new primitive in ES6. A symbol in itself isn't very interesting,
as it doesn't really do anything. They mostly become interesting when using them
as keys to Objects. Here's some symbol basics:
```js
const hi1 = Symbol('hi')
const hi2 = Symbol('hi')

console.log(hi1)
// => Symbol('hi')

console.log(hi1 === hi2)
// false

console.log(hi1 === hi1)
// true
```

## Function identifying with symbols

Checking if functions / objects are equal in JS is typically done with the
`===` operator. This checks if both functions point to the same location in
memory, and then returns a Boolean. In cases where you want to check if a
function or object is of a certain type (e.g. generated by a factory), you're
going to have a hard time. 

What you would want to do is attach a flag to the object to mark it as being a
certain type. Luckily with ES6 you can attach unique, enumerable flags (which 
means they don't show up when iterating over the keys) by using ES6 symbols.

Here's an example:
```js
const sym = Symbol('my unique string')

function generate () {
  const obj = {foo: 'bar'}
  obj[sym] = true
  return obj
}

const nw = generate()
const ot = generate()

nw === ot           // => false
nw[sym]             // => true

// don't ever do this, as if both values
// are undefined, it will also return true
nw[sym] === ot[sym]
```

## Private properties with symbols

Another neat usage for symbols is private properties in objects & classes.
Traditionally this has been done by prefixing properties with an
underscore (e.g. `this._property`) or by wrapping variables in closures. Symbols
allow true private properties in OOP. Combined with setters and getters they 
allow for powerful interactions. Here's an example:
```js
const key = new Symbol('my key')
function Foo () {
  if (!(this instaneof Foo)) return new Foo()
  this[key] = 'my secret key'
}

Object.defineProperty(Foo.prototype, 'key', {
  get: function () {return this[key]},
  set: function (val) {this[key] = val}
})

const foo = Foo()
console.log(foo.key)
// => 'my secret key'
```

## Wrapping up

If you want to use ES6 symbols today, check out
[es6-symbol](https://github.com/medikoo/es6-symbol). Alternatively you can use
[babel](https://www.npmjs.com/package/babel) for non-module code.

And that's it! I hope you were able to pick up some new party tricks to impress
friends at parties, cat cafes or on IRC.
