# home dir

Managing your home directory is pretty personal and kind of tricky. After being around for a few
years you most definitely have some cruft lying around (images, ebooks, music), and you should
start thinking about a system to manage it all. 

This weekend I tinkered a bit with the idea of implementing something analogous to the
Unix [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard][fhs] for my home folder. This means I had to slew down
6 years worth of administration into something manageable. These were my requirements:
- low levels of nesting
- suitable for programmers and non-programmers alike (though setup might be technical)
- leverage Dropbox, Google Drive or the likes. Losing files on hardware swap is annoying.

But let's cut to the chase, this is what I came up with:
```
etc/              other
  pwd/            `pass(1)` password files
lib/              resources that can be consumed
log/              scanned materials, sorted by date (2011, 2012, etc.)
media/            media
  cam/            img from camera
  read/           books, articles and the like
  screen/         screenshots
  tmp/            images that don't belong in any of the above
  vid/            movies, gifs
  wall/           wallpapers
  write/          stories, notes, posts
tmp/              temporary files
src/              source code
usr/              personal files, sorted by topics
  accounts/       account info & restoration files
  img/            avatar pictures
```

All of these dirs should be symlinked from `~/mnt/Google Drive` or `~/mnt/Dropbox` to
keep them in sync with the cloud. Keep an eye on [yoshuawuyts/dotfiles][dotfiles], I'll have
a script for it soonish.

#### Rationale
I'll walk you my thought process on this one.

- There needs to be a place for permanent, _other_ type of files. This has become `etc/`
- We need to be able to store licensed files to consume on new machines. Since we cannot
check them into a public git repo (e.g. our `dotfiles`) this is now `lib/`.
- New data (bills, warranties, healthcare, etc.) is analogous to a data stream. 
We store this in `log/`, ordened by year. The data consists of date + topic + extension (e.g. 
`2014-11-23-healthcare-bill-knee.pdf`). By not sorting the data beforehand it's much easier
to process, and when a certain document it's easy to find because of the chronological
ordening.
- `src` is where git and friends reside, ordened by owner. I have node modules under `src/js`, 
personal folders under `src/yoshua`, etc.
- `usr` is to keep user specific files. Also for summaries of financial state, plans and the like.
If you have multiple personas (company, partner, children, etc.) you might want to create 
subfolders in this.
- `media/` is the location for all media. This is
- `mnt/` is where Google drive / Dropbox resides.

#### Considerations
I'm sure that the snapshot above can be improved a ton. If you have any suggestions I'd be eager
to hear. These are my current considerations:

- What's the difference between `usr/` and `etc/`. Should `usr/accounts/` be in `etc/recovery/` instead? Or maybe
move `etc/pwd/` to `usr/pwd/`? Somehow `etc/` feels natural, but it feels like we should keep just one.
- Should `usr/img/` be placed under `media/usr/` since it is actually media? I like the idea of a general
account location though.
- What's a good way to deal with user generated data for non-programmers? I check most of my work into
git nowadays, but what if you don't have that? Is `usr/` the correct location for that?

Hopefully this was useful! If you have any questions or comments open up an issue 
on [yoshuawuyts/knowledge][knowledge] or ping me on [@yoshuawuyts][twitter].

[fhs]: https://github.com/yoshuawuyts/knowledge/blob/master/code/filesystem-hierarchy.md
[pass]: http://www.passwordstore.org/
[dotfiles]: https://github.com/yoshuawuyts/dotfiles
[knowledge]: https://github.com/yoshuawuyts/knowledge
[twitter]: https://twitter.com/yoshuawuyts
